# Jupyter (previously iPython) notebooks

Notebooks are a good way to embed working Python scripts within a narrative. For example, you might use them to explain the methodology behind a story, or as a more accessible way to commend code that you have used. [Here, for example, data journalist David Blood uses a Python notebook to explain how to use notebooks to find and analyse data](https://github.com/davidbjourno/finding-stories-in-data/blob/master/finding-stories-in-data.ipynb).

Notebooks have 3 parts:

* Python code, prefixed by `In` and a number, e.g. `In [1]:`. This is working code that you can run within the notebook.
* Outputs, below (and generated by) the Python code above it. Sometimes, but not always, these are also prefixed by `Out` and a number, e.g. `Out [1]:`.
* Narrative, written in Markdown

When in Jupyter, the notebook is a working piece of code, which can be run on anyone else's machine. It might generate different errors on that machine to your own (for example if it doesn't have the same libraries installed). 

When on GitHub, however, the notebook works as a narrative (the code cannot be run unless downloaded and opened in Jupyter).

You can [find out more about installing Jupyter Notebooks on the Jupyter website](https://jupyter.org/install.html): the simplest way to get started is to use the online environment TryJupyter, but at some point you'll want to run it from your own computer, using Anaconda or command line as explained at that link. 

Jupyter notebooks use the `.ipynb` extension (this stands for iPython Notebook). 

You can use the advanced search in GitHub to find files that use this extension. [Here, for example, are ipynb files that use the words 'data' and 'journalism'](https://github.com/search?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=data+journalism+extension%3Aipynb&type=Code&ref=advsearch&l=&l=)

## Writing your first notebook

Once Jupyter is running it will open in your browser at an address like `http://localhost:8888/tree`. This is a server running on your own computer (the 'local machine'). You should recognise the folders shown, such as 'Desktop', 'Documents', and so on.

Navigate to the folder that your project is in (this should be where the data, etc. is. If you haven't already created a folder for your project, do so first).

Once in the relevant folder, click on the **New** button in the upper right corner, and select *Python [Root]*.

This will open a new blank notebook, with a line ready for you to write some code, prefixed by `In [ ]:`. This line is called a **cell**.

### Inserting Markdown

You probably don't want to write code straight away, so change the cell type by clicking on the *Cell* menu, and select *Cell type > Markdown* 

Now you can type a heading into that cell by starting with a hash, like so:

`# My first Jupyter notebook`

Underneath that you can add normal text introducing your project. You can [use Markdown](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/) to add links, make text italic or bold or both, or add snippets of text. [Here's a cheatsheet](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet), but there are plenty of other resources.

### Inserting working code

When you want to switch from narrative to working code, insert a new cell by clicking on the *Insert* menu and choosing whether to insert it above or below the current cell.

